docs/source/migrations.rst, before:

.. highlight:: console

Migration-Guides
================

Only breaking changes are mentioned here. New features or fixes are only mentioned if they
somehow correspond to a breaking change.


.. contents::


Version 5 to 6 (alpha2)
-----------------------

**Subject to change till final release**

With version 6 the whole code base was restructured and with it the whole open library API
has changed. A simple migration is not possible. Please see the :ref:`api:API` section or
open an issue if you have open questions.

The new logging system may help you find issues while migrating to v6.
You may then want to turn it on on the lowest level ``--log-level DEBUG``.

``rstcheck`` moved from ``myint/rstcheck`` to ``rstcheck/rstcheck`` so you may want to update
links you have pointing to the old repository's location.

The ``master`` branch was renamed to ``main``. If you use git dependencies you may need to update
your reference.


Configuration file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

CLI options now overwrite settings in configuration files. Update your setup accordingly.

The following configuration keys changed:

- ``report`` renamed to ``report_level``
- ``ignore_language`` renamed to ``ignore_languages``

Set the ``--warn-unknown-settings`` CLI flag for warnings on unknown settings in
configuration files.


CLI
~~~

CLI options now overwrite settings in configuration files. Update your setup accordingly.

Non existing files are silently ignored.

The following CLI options changed:

- ``--report`` renamed to ``--report-level`` and no longer accepts integers
- ``--ignore-language`` renamed to ``--ignore-languages``
- ``--ignore`` dropped -> use ``--ignore-languages``
- ``--debug`` replaced with new ``--log-level`` -> use ``--log-level DEBUG``
- ``--version`` dropped without replacement


Sphinx features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for sphinx prior version 2.0 was dropped.

Hard-coded default values for roles and directives coming from ``sphinx`` were dropped.
If you encounter a lot of unknown roles and directives this may be the reason
(`Example issue`_).

To fix this simply add sphinx to the environment from where you run ``rstcheck``::

   $ pip install sphinx  # directly

   $ pip install rstcheck[sphinx]  # or via extra

To check if sphinx support is activate run::

   $ rstcheck --help | grep Sphinx


Version 4 to 5
--------------

Nothing to do if you don't need the test suit of ``rstcheck``.

Use ``tox`` to run test suite.


Version 3 to 4
--------------

Use python 3.7 or newer to run ``rstcheck``.

.. highlight:: default


.. _Example issue: https://github.com/rstcheck/rstcheck/issues/109

Commit message:

remove core libraray and use rstcheck-core

docs/source/migrations.rst, after:

.. highlight:: console

Migration-Guides
================

Only breaking changes are mentioned here. New features or fixes are only mentioned if they
somehow correspond to a breaking change.


.. contents::


Version 5 to 6 (alpha2)
-----------------------

**Subject to change till final release**

With version 6 the whole code base was restructured. The core library was moved into its own
repository.

The new logging system may help you find issues while migrating to v6.
You may then want to turn it on on the lowest level ``--log-level DEBUG``.

``rstcheck`` moved from ``myint/rstcheck`` to ``rstcheck/rstcheck`` so you may want to update
links you have pointing to the old repository's location.
Also the core library moved to the new repository ``rstcheck/rstcheck-core``.

The ``master`` branch was renamed to ``main``. If you use git dependencies you may need to update
your reference.


Configuration file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

CLI options now overwrite settings in configuration files. Update your setup accordingly.

The following configuration keys changed:

- ``report`` renamed to ``report_level``
- ``ignore_language`` renamed to ``ignore_languages``

Set the ``--warn-unknown-settings`` CLI flag for warnings on unknown settings in
configuration files.


CLI
~~~

CLI options now overwrite settings in configuration files. Update your setup accordingly.

Non existing files are silently ignored.

The following CLI options changed:

- ``--report`` renamed to ``--report-level`` and no longer accepts integers
- ``--ignore-language`` renamed to ``--ignore-languages``
- ``--ignore`` dropped -> use ``--ignore-languages``
- ``--debug`` replaced with new ``--log-level`` -> use ``--log-level DEBUG``
- ``--version`` dropped without replacement


Sphinx features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for sphinx prior version 2.0 was dropped.

Hard-coded default values for roles and directives coming from ``sphinx`` were dropped.
If you encounter a lot of unknown roles and directives this may be the reason
(`Example issue`_).

To fix this simply add sphinx to the environment from where you run ``rstcheck``::

   $ pip install sphinx  # directly

   $ pip install rstcheck[sphinx]  # or via extra

To check if sphinx support is activate run::

   $ rstcheck --help | grep Sphinx


Version 4 to 5
--------------

Nothing to do if you don't need the test suit of ``rstcheck``.

Use ``tox`` to run test suite.


Version 3 to 4
--------------

Use python 3.7 or newer to run ``rstcheck``.

.. highlight:: default


.. _Example issue: https://github.com/rstcheck/rstcheck/issues/109
